docs: restructure working PR (#4866)
dfinity/motoko: doc/md/fundamentals/3-declarations/1-variable-declarations.md

---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Variable declarations

In Motoko, variables are declared using either `let` (immutable) or `var` (mutable).

| Feature                 | `let`    | `var`       |
|-------------------------|---------|-------------|
| Reassignment           | Not allowed | Allowed |
| Value modification     | Cannot be updated after assignment. | Can be updated after assignment. |

> | Memory allocation      | Directly stores value. | Stores a reference to a memory location. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: FYI @Demali-876

> | Persistence in actors  | Retained unless assigned a mutable value. | Allowed with `stable var`. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| In `persistent` actors  | Retained on upgrade unless declared `transient`. | Retained on upgrade unless declared `transient` |
| In non-`persistent` actors  | Discarded on upgrade unless declared `stable`. |   Discarded on upgrade unless declared `stable`. | 
```
Or maybe don't mention here at all, or not in a table.

> | Persistence in actors  | Retained unless assigned a mutable value. | Allowed with `stable var`. |
> | Upgrade behavior       | Persists unless holding a `var` reference. | Must be explicitly marked `stable` to persist. |
> | Compiler optimization  | More optimal | Less optimal |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

In `persistent` actors, the values of `let` and `var` declarations are retained across upgrades, unless the declarations are marked `transient`.
In non-`persistent` actors, the values of `let` and `var` declarations are discarded across upgrades, unless the declarations are marked `stable`.
The `persistent` keyword on an actor just makes `let` and `var` declaration `stable` by default.
```

Author: FYI @Demali-876

Reviewer 3: Resolved in #5062

## Immutable variables

> A `let` declaration binds a value to a name and cannot be changed after assignment. The compiler ensures that any attempt to modify an immutable variable results in an error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `let` declaration names the value of an expression so that the expression can be evaluated once and its result, a value, referenced by that name. The compiler ensures that any attempt to modify an immutable variable results in an error.
```

```motoko no-repl
let x = 10;
x := 20; // Error: Cannot assign to immutable variable
```

> ### Memory binding in `let`
> 
> When using `let`, Motoko stores the value directly in memory and does not allow it to change. Since it never changes, the compiler can optimize `let` variables making them more efficient.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: This is not really accurate, everything goes "directly in memory"; It doesn't seem the place to discuss how and we'd need to get to a technical level to describe this accurately, and the part about "making them more efficient" is likely incorrect.

Author: FYI @Demali-876

Reviewer 3: With "directly in memory," I was trying to refer more to permanence—that the value is allocated once in memory and cannot be changed, rather than implying anything specific about memory layout. 

Immutability can be more efficient in certain contexts. I assume Motoko encourages immutability partly because of this similar to other languages, It might not be as important for motoko because it is single threaded, but generally immutability still provides semantic clarity and safety, which are valuable regardless of execution model.

> ## Mutable variables

Author: @Demali-876

> ## Mutable variables

Reviewer 3: Ahhh yes i believe i noted this elsewhere but it could be reiterated here

> ## Mutable variables

Author: Moved to respective PR

> A `var` declaration allocates space in memory where the value can be updated. Unlike `let`, `var` allows reassignment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `var` declaration refers to a variable whose value can be updated. Unlike `let`, `var` allows reassignment.
```

```motoko no-repl
var y = 10;
y := 20; // Allowed, updates the value of y
```

> ### Memory binding in `var`
> 
> When using `var`, Motoko creates a reference to a memory location used to update the value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: seems inaccurate, remove.

Author: FYI @Demali-876
